What is a Project Definition Document?
It provides the necessary project guidance, so don't leave home without it.
If you are in the requirements gathering business I would
like to suggest to you that you must have a Project
Definition Template or document.
It is a must have to establish key elements of your project.
The project definition is a statement of the scope,
objectives, and participants you must collect to establish your initial scope,
and more importantly,
you must understand and define your customers' expectations.
Remember, always keep the focus on the customer and their expectations.
Gather the right amount of information for the level of effort.
So what is the right information you should collect?
Well, it depends.
It needs to be the right amount and let's see what that is by
reviewing the Project Definition Template.
The Project Definition Template is composed of a checklist of attributes.
This is just a starter list.
So what is in a Project Definition Template?
Purpose.
What is the purpose of this project?
Remember earlier, we need to know this to determine the end result.
Goals and objectives.
Here you would write a more detailed list of goals or objectives.
These are written in the user terms or vocabulary.
No techy talk here.
Success criteria.
What determines the success of the project?
List the items that must be completed, including schedule if you can,
and the budget.
What's out of scope?
List the items you will not implement.
This is important as projects progress, as we need to track this.
Assumptions.
For example,
the new system must be implemented after a particular date
or before a new customer comes on board.
Return on investment.
Is this project worthwhile?
Will it increase revenue?
Will it decrease costs?
Recommended approach.
Detail the approach this project will take.
It might include technology or project organization.
Business drivers.
Key business drivers that give viability to this project.
These are critical and we use to validate project decisions in the future.
Constraints.
These may be resource, schedule, people, budget, etc.
Risks.
What risks are possible if you do the project?
For example, this project may affect other projects.
What are the risks if you don't do this project?
Stakeholders.
The users, the management team, the steering committee,
vendors or suppliers, list everyone that may be involved in the project.
Preliminary cost and schedule.
Rough out what you think this may take to do.
You might want to do this last after you have gathered more requirements.
Preliminary resource estimates.
This is what resources you need for the project.
These could be people in your company, consultants,
dollars, equipment, and things like that.
Policies and standards.
What, if any, company policies and standards are driving this project?
Legal and regulatory.
What legal or regulatory items are driving this project?
Just HIPPA for example.
Competitor drivers.
What are your competitors doing that drives some of
the requirements for this project?
This is only a partial list.
Improve on it and add to it with each new project.
Structure and 'Right' Level of Effort.
Project Definition Template Structure.
This is your checklist of the superset of all possible
attributes you may need for any project.
Let's keep it simple and put them all in an MS/Word document.
How large or complex is this project?
Not every item in your Project Definition Template would be
appropriate or need to be filled out.
So balance the need for rigor and detail in contrast to the
requirement for speed and efficiency.
Let's talk about the right level of effort.
Address each checklist item that is relevant for your project.
Do not remove items from your project document just mark them as does not apply,
in the case they are relevant downstream in the process.
Your Project Definition Template should grow and improve with each project.
With each new project you will discover additional items
or more elaboration on existing items. Always update and improve your template.